= IRIG Audio Decoder =

== Synopsis ==

["verse",subs="normal"]
Address: 127.127.6.'u'
Reference ID: IRIG
Audio Device: +/dev/audio+ and +/dev/audioctl+

== Deprecation warning ==

This refclock is deprecated and obsolete. The {project-shortname}
maintainers plan to remove it in a future release.  If you have a
requirement for it, please make this known to us.

== Description ==

This driver synchronizes the computer time using the Inter-Range
Instrumentation Group (IRIG) standard time distribution signal. This
signal is generated by several radio clocks, including those made by
Arbiter, Austron, Bancomm, Odetics, Spectracom, Symmetricom and
TrueTime, among others, although it is often an add-on option. The
signal is connected via an optional attenuator and cable to either the
microphone or line-in port of a workstation or PC.

The driver requires an audio codec or sound card with sampling rate 8
kHz and &mu;-law companding to demodulate the data. This is the same
standard as used by the telephone industry and is supported by most
hardware and operating systems, including Solaris, FreeBSD and Linux,
among others. In this implementation, only one audio driver and codec
can be supported on a single machine. In order to assure reliable signal
capture, the codec frequency error must be less than 250 PPM (.025
percent). If necessary, the +tinker codec+ configuration command can be
used to bracket the codec frequency to this range.

For proper operation the IRIG signal source should be configured for
analog signal levels, not digital TTL levels. In most radios the IRIG
signal is driven &plusmn;10 V behind 50 Ohms. In such cases the cable should be
terminated at the line-in port with a 50-Ohm resistor to avoid
overloading the codec. Where feasible, the IRIG signal source should be
operated with signature control so that, if the signal is lost or
mutilated, the source produces an unmodulated signal, rather than
possibly random digits. The driver automatically rejects the data and
declares itself unsynchronized in this case. Some devices, in particular
Spectracom radio/satellite clocks, provide additional year and status
indication; other devices may not.

In general and without calibration, the driver is accurate within 500 &mu;s
relative to the IRIG time. After calibrating relative to the PPS signal
from a GPS receiver, the mean offset with a 2.4-GHz P4 running FreeBSD
6.1 is less than 20 &mu;s with standard deviation 10 &mu;s. Most of this is
due to residuals after filtering and averaging the raw codec samples,
which have an inherent jitter of 125 &mu;s. The processor load due to the
driver is 0.6 percent on the P4.

However, be acutely aware that the accuracy with Solaris 2.8 and beyond
has been seriously degraded to the order of several milliseconds. The
Sun kernel driver has a sawtooth modulation with amplitude over 5 ms P-P
and period 5.5 s. This distortion is especially prevalent with Sun Blade
1000 and possibly other systems.

The driver performs a number of error checks to protect against
overdriven or underdriven input signal levels, incorrect signal format
or improper hardware configuration. The specific checks are detailed
later in this page. Note that additional checks are done elsewhere in
the reference clock interface routines.

This driver incorporates several features in common with other audio
drivers such as described in the link:driver7.html[Radio CHU Audio
Demodulator/Decoder].  They include automatic gain control (AGC),
selectable audio codec port and signal monitoring capabilities. For a
discussion of these common features, as well as a guide to hookup,
debugging and monitoring, see the link:audio.html[Reference Clock
Audio Drivers] page.

== Technical Overview ==

The IRIG signal format uses an amplitude-modulated carrier with
pulse-width modulated data bits. For IRIG-B, the carrier frequency is
1000 Hz and bit rate 100 b/s; for IRIG-E, the carrier frequenchy is 100
Hz and bit rate 10 b/s. While IRIG-B provides the best accuracy,
generally within a few tens of microseconds relative to IRIG time, it
can also generate a significant processor load with older workstations.
Generally, the accuracy with IRIG-E is about ten times worse than
IRIG-B, but the processor load is somewhat less. Technical details about
the IRIG formats can be found in
http://handle.dtic.mil/100.2/ADA346250[IRIG Standard 200-98].

The driver processes 8000-Hz &mu;-law companded samples using separate
signal filters for IRIG-B and IRIG-E, a comb filter, envelope detector
and automatic threshold corrector. An infinite impulse response (IIR)
1000-Hz bandpass filter is used for IRIG-B and an IIR 130-Hz lowpass
filter for IRIG-E. These are intended for use with noisy signals, such
as might be received over a telephone line or radio circuit, or when
interfering signals may be present in the audio passband. The driver
determines which IRIG format is in use by sampling the amplitude of each
filter output and selecting the one with maximum signal.

Cycle crossings relative to the corrected slice level determine the
width of each pulse and its value - zero, one or position identifier
(PI). The data encode ten characters (20 BCD digits) which determine the
second, minute, hour and day of the year and with some IRIG generators
the year and synchronization condition. The comb filter exponentially
averages the corresponding samples of successive baud intervals in order
to reliably identify the reference carrier cycle.

A type-II phase-lock loop (PLL) performs additional integration and
interpolation to accurately determine the zero crossing of that cycle,
which determines the reference timestamp. A pulse-width discriminator
demodulates the data pulses, which are then encoded as the BCD digits of
the timecode. The timecode and reference timestamp are updated once each
second with IRIG-B (ten seconds with IRIG-E) and local clock offset
samples saved for later processing. At poll intervals of 64 s, the saved
samples are processed by a median filter and used to update the system
clock.

== Monitor Data ==

The timecode format used for debugging and data recording includes data
helpful in diagnosing problems with the IRIG signal and codec
connections. The driver produces one line for each timecode in the
following format:

+00 00 98 23 19:26:52 2782 143 0.694 10 0.3 66.5 3094572411.00027+

If clockstats is enabled, the most recent line is written to the
clockstats file every 64 s. If verbose recording is enabled (fudge flag
4) each line is written as generated.

The first field contains the error flags in hex, where the hex bits are
interpreted as below. This is followed by the year of century, day of
year and time of day. Note that the time of day is for the previous
minute, not the current time. The status indicator and year are not
produced by some IRIG devices and appear as zeros. Following these
fields are the carrier amplitude (0-3000), codec gain (0-255),
modulation index (0-1), time constant (4-10), carrier phase error
(0Â±0.5) and carrier frequency error (PPM). The last field is the on-time
timestamp in NTP format.

The error flags are defined as follows in hex:

+x01+::
  Low signal. The carrier amplitude is less than 100 units. This is
  usually the result of no signal or wrong input port.
+x02+::
  Frequency error. The codec frequency error is greater than 250 PPM.
  This may be due to wrong signal format or (rarely) defective codec.
+x04+::
  Modulation error. The IRIG modulation index is less than 0.5. This is
  usually the result of an overdriven codec, wrong signal format or
  wrong input port.
+x08+::
  Frame synch error. The decoder frame does not match the IRIG frame.
  This is usually the result of an overdriven codec, wrong signal format
  or noisy IRIG signal. It may also be the result of an IRIG signature
  check which indicates a failure of the IRIG signal synchronization
  source.
+x10+::
  Data bit error. The data bit length is out of tolerance. This is
  usually the result of an overdriven codec, wrong signal format or
  noisy IRIG signal.
+x20+::
  Seconds numbering discrepancy. The decoder second does not match the
  IRIG second. This is usually the result of an overdriven codec, wrong
  signal format or noisy IRIG signal.
+x40+::
  Codec error (overrun). The machine is not fast enough to keep up with
  the codec.
+x80+::
  Device status error (Spectracom).

== Fudge Factors ==

+time1+ 'time'::
  Specifies the time offset calibration factor, in seconds and fraction,
  with default 0.0.
+time2+ 'time'::
  Not used by this driver.
+stratum+ 'number'::
  Specifies the driver stratum, in decimal from 0 to 15, with default 0.
+refid+ 'string'::
  Specifies the driver reference identifier, an ASCII string from one to
  four characters, with default +IRIG+.
+flag1 {0 | 1}+::
  Not used by this driver.
+flag2 {0 | 1}+::
  Specifies the microphone port if set to zero or the line-in port if
  set to one. It does not seem useful to specify the compact disc player
  port.
+flag3 {0 | 1}+::
  Enables audio monitoring of the input signal. For this purpose, the
  speaker volume must be set before the driver is started.
+flag4 {0 | 1}+::
  Enable verbose +clockstats+ recording if set.

== Author ==

David L. Mills <mills@udel.edu>

'''''

include::includes/footer.txt[]
