= Quick Start =

.FAX test image for SATNET (1979).
image:pic/panda.gif[]

The baby panda was scanned at University College London and used as a
FAX test image for a demonstration of the DARPA Atlantic SATNET Program
and the first transatlantic Internet connection in 1978. The computing
system used for that demonstration was called the
http://www.eecis.udel.edu/%7emills/database/papers/fuzz.ps[Fuzzball]. As
it happened, this was also the first Internet multimedia presentation
and the first to use a predecessor of NTP in regular operation. The
image was widely copied and used for testing purpose throughout much of
the 1980s.

== Related Links ==

include::includes/install.txt[]

'''''

For the rank amateur the sheer volume of the documentation collection
must be intimidating. However, it doesn't take much to fly the +{ntpd}+
daemon with a simple configuration where a workstation needs to
synchronize to some server elsewhere in the Internet. The first thing is
to build the distribution for the particular workstation and install in
the usual place. The link:build.html[Building and Installing the
Distribution] page describes how to do this.

While it is possible that certain configurations do not need a
configuration file, most do. The file, called by default
+/etc/{ntpconf}+, need only contain one command specifying a remote
server, for instance

+server foo.bar.com+

Choosing an appropriate remote server is somewhat of a black art, but a
suboptimal choice is seldom a problem. The simplest and best is to use
the Server Pool Scheme on the link:discover.html[Automatic Server
Discovery] page. There are about two dozen public time servers operated
by the http://tf.nist.gov/tf-cgi/servers.cgi[National Institutes of
Science and Technology (NIST)], http://tycho.usno.navy.mil/ntp.html[US
Naval Observatory (USNO)],
http://www.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/eng/services/time/network_time.html[Canadian
Metrology Centre (CMC)] and many others available on the Internet. Lists
of public primary and secondary NTP servers maintained on the
http://support.ntp.org/Servers/WebHome[Public NTP Time Servers] page,
which is updated frequently. The lists are sorted by country and, in the
case of the US, by state. Usually, the best choice is the nearest in
geographical terms, but the terms of engagement specified in each list
entry should be carefully respected.

During operation +{ntpd}+ measures and corrects for incidental clock
frequency error and occasionally writes the current value to a file
specified by the

+driftfile /etc/ntp.drift+

configuration command. If +{ntpd}+ is stopped and restarted, it
initializes the frequency from this file and avoids the potentially
lengthy interval to relearn the correction.

That's all there is to it, unless some problem in network connectivity
or local operating system configuration occurs. The most common problem
is some firewall between the workstation and server. System
administrators should understand NTP uses UDP port 123 as both the
source and destination port and that NTP does not involve any operating
system interaction other than to set the system clock. While almost all
modern Unix systems have included NTP and UDP port 123 defined in the
services file, this should be checked if +{ntpd}+ fails to come up at all.

The best way to confirm NTP is working is using the
link:ntpq.html[+{ntpq}+] utility. See the documentation pages for
further information. Don't forget to check for link:msyslog.html[system
log messages]. In the most extreme cases the +-d+ option on the +{ntpd}+
command line results in a blow-by-blow trace of the daemon operations.
While the trace output can be cryptic, to say the least, it gives a
general idea of what the program is doing and, in particular, details
the arriving and departing packets and any errors found.

'''''

include::includes/footer.txt[]
